Add vinyl section to configuration reference (#4298)
tarantool/doc: doc/reference/configuration/configuration_reference.rst

:ref:`vinyl storage engine <internals-vinyl>`.

..  NOTE::

    ``vinyl`` can be defined in any :ref:`scope <configuration_scopes>`.

-   :ref:`vinyl.bloom_fpr <configuration_reference_vinyl_bloom_fpr>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.cache <configuration_reference_vinyl_cache>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.defer_deletes <configuration_reference_vinyl_defer_deletes>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.dir <configuration_reference_vinyl_dir>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.max_tuple_size <configuration_reference_vinyl_max_tuple_size>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.memory <configuration_reference_vinyl_memory>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.page_size <configuration_reference_vinyl_page_size>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.range_size <configuration_reference_vinyl_range_size>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.read_threads <configuration_reference_vinyl_read_threads>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.run_count_per_level <configuration_reference_vinyl_run_count_per_level>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.run_size_ratio <configuration_reference_vinyl_run_size_ratio>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.timeout <configuration_reference_vinyl_timeout>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.write_threads <configuration_reference_vinyl_write_threads>`

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_bloom_fpr:

..  confval:: vinyl.bloom_fpr

>     Bloom filter false positive rate -- the suitable probability of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A bloom filter's false positive rate -- the suitable probability of the
```

    `bloom filter <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom_filter>`_
    to give a wrong result.
    The ``vinyl.bloom_fpr`` setting is a default value for one of the

>     options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

Reviewer: > for one of the options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart

Let's update the default value for this option from the old `vinyl_bloom_fpr` box.cfg option to a new `vinyl.bloom_fpr` config option. The same can be done for other vinyl options passed to `create_index()`.

Reviewer 2: It is 0.05 in the box.cfg reference too, [as I see](https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/reference/configuration/#cfg-storage-vinyl-bloom-fpr).

>     The ``vinyl.bloom_fpr`` setting is a default value for one of the
>     options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The ``vinyl.bloom_fpr`` setting is a default value for the ``bloom_fpr``
    option passed to the :ref:`space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` method.
```

    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_BLOOM_FPR

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_cache:

..  confval:: vinyl.cache

    The cache size for the vinyl storage engine. The cache can
    be resized dynamically.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 128 * 1024 * 1024
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_CACHE

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_defer_deletes:

..  confval:: vinyl.defer_deletes

    Enable the deferred DELETE optimization in vinyl. It was disabled by default
    since Tarantool version 2.10 to avoid possible performance degradation
    of secondary index reads.

    |
    | Type: boolean
    | Default: false
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_DEFER_DELETES

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_dir:

..  confval:: vinyl.dir

    A directory where vinyl files or subdirectories will be stored.

    This option may contain a relative file path.
    In this case, it is interpreted as relative to
    :ref:`process.work_dir <configuration_reference_process_work_dir>`.

    |
    | Type: string
    | Default: 'var/lib/{{ instance_name }}'
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_DIR

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_max_tuple_size:

..  confval:: vinyl.max_tuple_size

>     Size of the largest allocation unit,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The size of the largest allocation unit
```

    for the vinyl storage engine. It can be increased if it
    is necessary to store large tuples.

    See also: :ref:`memtx.max_tuple_size <configuration_reference_memtx_max_size>`.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 1024 * 1024
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_MAX_TUPLE_SIZE

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_memory:

..  confval:: vinyl.memory

    The maximum number of in-memory bytes that vinyl uses.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 128 * 1024 * 1024
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_MEMORY

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_page_size:

..  confval:: vinyl.page_size

>     Page size. Page is a read/write unit for vinyl disk operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The page size. A page is a read/write unit for vinyl disk operations.
```

    The ``vinyl.page_size`` setting is a default value for one of the
    options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 8 * 1024
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_PAGE_SIZE

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_range_size:

..  confval:: vinyl.range_size

    The default maximum range size for a vinyl index, in bytes.

>     The maximum range size affects the decision whether to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The maximum range size affects the decision of whether to
```

    :ref:`split <engines-vinyl_split>` a range.

    If ``vinyl.range_size`` is specified (but the value is not ``null`` or 0), then
    it is used as the default value for the ``range_size`` option in the
    :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    If ``vinyl.range_size`` is not specified (or is explicitly set to ``null`` or 0),
    and ``range_size`` is not specified when the index is created,
    then Tarantool sets a value later depending on performance considerations.
    To see the actual value, use
    :doc:`index_object:stat().range_size </reference/reference_lua/box_index/stat>`.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: box.NULL (means that an effective default is determined in runtime)
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_RANGE_SIZE

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_read_threads:

..  confval:: vinyl.read_threads

>     The maximum number of read threads that vinyl can use for some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The maximum number of read threads that vinyl can use for
```

    concurrent operations, such as I/O and compression.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 1
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_READ_THREADS

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_run_count_per_level:

..  confval:: vinyl.run_count_per_level

>     The maximal number of runs per level in vinyl LSM tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The maximum number of runs per level in the vinyl LSM tree.
```

    If this number is exceeded, a new level is created.
    The ``vinyl.run_count_per_level`` setting is a default value for one of the
    options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 2
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_RUN_COUNT_PER_LEVEL

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_run_size_ratio:

..  confval:: vinyl.run_size_ratio

>     Ratio between the sizes of different levels in the LSM tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The ratio between the sizes of different levels in the LSM tree.
```

    The ``vinyl.run_size_ratio`` setting is a default value for one of the
    options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    |
    | Type: number
    | Default: 3.5
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_RUN_SIZE_RATIO

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_timeout:

..  confval:: vinyl.timeout

>     The vinyl storage engine has a scheduler which does compaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The vinyl storage engine has a scheduler that performs compaction.
```

    When vinyl is low on available memory, the compaction scheduler
    may be unable to keep up with incoming update requests.
    In that situation, queries may time out after ``vinyl.timeout`` seconds.

>     This should rarely occur, since normally vinyl

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This should rarely occur, since, normally vinyl
```

>     would throttle inserts when it is running low on compaction bandwidth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    throttles inserts when it is running low on compaction bandwidth.
```

>     Compaction can also be ordered manually with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Compaction can also be initiated manually with
```

    :doc:`/reference/reference_lua/box_index/compact`.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 60
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_TIMEOUT

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_write_threads:

..  confval:: vinyl.write_threads

>     The maximum number of write threads that vinyl can use for some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The maximum number of write threads that vinyl can use for
```

    | Default: 10^18
    | Environment variable: TT_SNAPSHOT_BY_WAL_SIZE

> ???

Reviewer 2: It seems, it is a work-in-progress marker that was forgotten when the job has been done.

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl:

vinyl
-----

The ``vinyl`` section defines configuration parameters related to the
:ref:`vinyl storage engine <internals-vinyl>`.

..  NOTE::

    ``vinyl`` can be defined in any :ref:`scope <configuration_scopes>`.

-   :ref:`vinyl.bloom_fpr <configuration_reference_vinyl_bloom_fpr>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.cache <configuration_reference_vinyl_cache>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.defer_deletes <configuration_reference_vinyl_defer_deletes>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.dir <configuration_reference_vinyl_dir>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.max_tuple_size <configuration_reference_vinyl_max_tuple_size>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.memory <configuration_reference_vinyl_memory>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.page_size <configuration_reference_vinyl_page_size>`

> -   :ref:`vinyl.range_size <configuration_reference_vinyl_>`

Reviewer 2: This link [is not rendered](https://docs.d.tarantool.io/en/doc/gh-4018-vinyl-config/reference/configuration/configuration_reference/#vinyl) on the website.

-   :ref:`vinyl.read_threads <configuration_reference_vinyl_read_threads>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.run_count_per_level <configuration_reference_vinyl_run_count_per_level>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.run_size_ratio <configuration_reference_vinyl_run_size_ratio>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.timeout <configuration_reference_vinyl_timeout>`
-   :ref:`vinyl.write_threads <configuration_reference_vinyl_write_threads>`

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_bloom_fpr:

..  confval:: vinyl.bloom_fpr

    Bloom filter false positive rate -- the suitable probability of the
    `bloom filter <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom_filter>`_
    to give a wrong result.
    The ``vinyl.bloom_fpr`` setting is a default value for one of the
    options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    |

>     | Type: float

Reviewer 2: We call this type `number` across the document.

`float` may be confusing here, because sometimes it means a 32-bit floating point value (in contrast to 64-bit floating point value called `double`).

    | Default: 0.05
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_BLOOM_FPR

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_cache:

..  confval:: vinyl.cache

    The cache size for the vinyl storage engine. The cache can
    be resized dynamically.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 128 * 1024 * 1024
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_CACHE

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_defer_deletes:

..  confval:: vinyl.defer_deletes

    Enable the deferred DELETE optimization in vinyl. It was disabled by default
    since Tarantool version 2.10 to avoid possible performance degradation
    of secondary index reads.

    |
    | Type: boolean
    | Default: false
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_DEFER_DELETES

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_dir:

..  confval:: vinyl.dir

    A directory where vinyl files or subdirectories will be stored.

    This option may contain a relative file path.
    In this case, it is interpreted as relative to
    :ref:`process.work_dir <configuration_reference_process_work_dir>`.

    |
    | Type: string

>     | Default: var/lib/{{ instance_name }}'

Reviewer 2: Unbalanced single quote. As I see, other directories with a template variable are quoted, so I would do it here as well for consistency.

    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_DIR

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_max_tuple_size:

..  confval:: vinyl.max_tuple_size

    Size of the largest allocation unit,
    for the vinyl storage engine. It can be increased if it
    is necessary to store large tuples.

>     See also: :ref:`memtx.max_tuple_size <configuration_reference_memtx_max_tuple_size>`.

Reviewer 2: 1. I would place the 'See also' in its own paragraph.
2. The link is not rendered on the website.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 1024 * 1024
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_MAX_TUPLE_SIZE

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_memory:

..  confval:: vinyl.memory

    The maximum number of in-memory bytes that vinyl uses.

    |
    | Type: integer

>     | Default: 28 * 1024 * 1024

Reviewer 2: Typo: 28 -> 128.

..  confval:: vinyl.page_size

    Page size. Page is a read/write unit for vinyl disk operations.
    The ``vinyl.page_size`` setting is a default value for one of the
    options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 8 * 1024
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_PAGE_SIZE

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_range_size:

..  confval:: vinyl.range_size

    The default maximum range size for a vinyl index, in bytes.
    The maximum range size affects the decision whether to
    :ref:`split <engines-vinyl_split>` a range.

    If ``vinyl.range_size`` is not nil and not 0, then
    it is used as the
    default value for the ``range_size`` option in the
    :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    If ``vinyl.range_size`` is nil or 0, and ``range_size`` is not specified
    when the index is created, then Tarantool sets a value later depending on
    performance considerations. To see the actual value, use
    :doc:`index_object:stat().range_size </reference/reference_lua/box_index/stat>`.

    |
    | Type: integer

>     | Default: box.NULL

Reviewer 2: A reader can guess that a default behavior is described in this 'nil or 0' paragraph. However, the default is `box.NULL` and technically such a case is not described in the option description.

Moreover, a reader likely works with this machinery by creating/editing a YAML file, where we have neither `nil`, nor `box.NULL` (but we have a missed value and `null`).

I think we should make a little stop here and look how the options, which has `box_cfg` annotation in the schema, works.

----

First, a YAML file (or YAML document from a config storage) is parsed into Lua. If there is no option in YAML, it is `nil` in Lua. If the option is `null` in YAML, it is `box.NULL` in Lua.

| config.yaml | no option | `null`     |
| ----------- | --------- | ---------- |
| Lua         | `nil`     | `box.NULL` |

Next, default values are applied. Let's assume that the `default` annotation contains `box.NULL`.

| config.yaml   | no option  | `null`     |
| ----------- | --------- | ---------- |
| Lua           | `nil`      | `box.NULL` |
| apply default | `box.NULL` | `box.NULL` |

The important fact here is that a missing option is the same as `null` option.

Then the option is passed to the `box.cfg()` call. The `box.cfg()` code assumes that `box.NULL` and `''` (an empty string) means a default value (from the `default_cfg` table in `src/box/lua/load_cfg.lua`).

The important fact here is that `default = box.NULL` for an option with the `box_cfg` annotation means that the effective default is determined somewhere under the hood.

Usually `instance_config.lua` has `box.NULL` default for options, whose default is either hard to determine from Lua (depends on the OS, for example) or if the default is determined in runtime.

`load_cfg.lua::default_cfg.vinyl_range_size` is `nil`. Actually, it means that the effective default is determined in runtime.

Going down by the code we can see that `vinyl_range_size = nil` is represented as 0 in the C code and it means that a missed option, `null` and 0 in YAML are equivalent.

Going further, we can see that if the option is 0 in C, some heuristic is applied (`vy_lsm_range_size` in `src/box/vy_lsm.c`).

----

To sum up:

1. `box.NULL` is a marker that means that the effective default is determined in runtime. `config:get()` returns `box.NULL`. An effective value is something that `vy_lsm_range_size()` returns.

   It is a bit different from the existing `Default: box.NULL`, as for me. I would describe it somehow like `Default: box.NULL (means that an effective default is determined in runtime)`.
3. Missed option, `null` and 0 are equivalent in the case.
4. `nil` may confuse a reader of this document, because the document is likely read in context of YAML.

Author: Thanks a lot for the details! My suggestion, please say if it's ok:

```
    <...>
    If ``vinyl.range_size`` is specified (but the value is not ``null`` or 0), then
    it is used as the default value for the ``range_size`` option in the
    :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    If ``vinyl.range_size`` is not specified (or is explicitly set to ``null`` or 0),
    and ``range_size`` is not specified when the index is created,
    then Tarantool sets a value later depending on performance considerations.
    To see the actual value, use
    :doc:`index_object:stat().range_size </reference/reference_lua/box_index/stat>`.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: box.NULL (means that an effective default is determined in runtime)
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_RANGE_SIZE
```

Reviewer 2: Seems OK, thanks for the update!

    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_RANGE_SIZE

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_read_threads:

..  confval:: vinyl.read_threads

    The maximum number of read threads that vinyl can use for some
    concurrent operations, such as I/O and compression.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 1
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_READ_THREADS

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_run_count_per_level:

..  confval:: vinyl.run_count_per_level

    The maximal number of runs per level in vinyl LSM tree.
    If this number is exceeded, a new level is created.
    The ``vinyl.run_count_per_level`` setting is a default value for one of the
    options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    |
    | Type: integer
    | Default: 2
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_RUN_COUNT_PER_LEVEL

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_run_size_ratio:

..  confval:: vinyl.run_size_ratio

    Ratio between the sizes of different levels in the LSM tree.
    The ``vinyl.run_size_ratio`` setting is a default value for one of the
    options in the :ref:`Options for space_object:create_index() <box_space-create_index>` chart.

    |

>     | Type: float

Reviewer 2: Same here: we call this type `number`.

    | Default: 3.5
    | Environment variable: TT_VINYL_RUN_SIZE_RATIO

..  _configuration_reference_vinyl_timeout:

..  confval:: vinyl.timeout

    The vinyl storage engine has a scheduler which does compaction.
    When vinyl is low on available memory, the compaction scheduler
    may be unable to keep up with incoming update requests.

>     In that situation, queries may time out after ``vinyl_timeout`` seconds.

Reviewer 2: Typo: `vinyl_timeout` -> `vinyl.timeout`.
